---
layout: post
title: Symbols
updated: 2017-04-19
---

Common Lisp symbols hide an extraordinary amount of complexity behind their
simple appearances.

* toc
{:toc}

What's a symbol?

> It's a variable, obviously. See, I can do `(defvar foo 4)` so 'foo' must be a
> variable equal to 4. What a silly question.

Well. Okay, how about classes? `(defclass foo () ())` is also valid -- now what
does `foo` mean?

Or functions? What is `foo` after you run `(defun foo ())`?

Let's have a look. Here is a REPL transcript defining all the `foo`s:

~~~ common-lisp
CL-USER> (defvar foo 4)
FOO
CL-USER> (defclass foo () ())
#<STANDARD-CLASS COMMON-LISP-USER::FOO>
CL-USER> (defun foo ())
FOO
~~~

Now, you can inspect it!

~~~ common-lisp
CL-USER> (inspect 'foo)

The object is a SYMBOL.
0. Name: "FOO"
1. Package: #<PACKAGE "COMMON-LISP-USER">
2. Value: 4
3. Function: #<FUNCTION FOO>
4. Plist: NIL
~~~

Lets go over each of those things.

### The object is a SYMBOL

The thing we have inspected is an instance of thing called a SYMBOL, and is
accessible at the memory address 0x1002E0D2DF.

This is already more complicated than you might have thought. A symbol is
actually a complex "object" with its own chunk of memory. It is not simply a
compiler/interpreter name or flag. We can access the symbol by evaluating
`(quote foo)`, or, more commonly, `'foo`.


### Name: "FOO"


The symbol we inspected (when we typed `'foo`) has a name of "FOO". This is used
for lots of things, such as providing a printed representation of the symbol.

Note -- it is uppercase here, but *it does not have to be*. There is something
called a "readtable" which (among other things) tells the Common Lisp source
code reader what case to use when reading symbols we type.


### Package: #<PACKAGE "COMMON-LISP-USER">

The symbol being inspected is internal to the COMMON-LISP-USER package
(abbreviated to CL-USER at the REPL).

This is important. It could be interpreted to mean that symbols have "home"
packages. There are quotation marks around that because it is not quite precise,
but is a useful way to think about it. Essentially, symbols are objects, and, to
access them, you need to know where they were defined.

A 'plain' symbol can be interned (created) with the [INTERN][clhs-intern]
function, for example, `(intern "BAR")` creates a new symbol in the current
package and names it "BAR". It will not be bound to any value, it will not have
a function value, and it will not name a class. However it is still a symbol!

~~~ common-lisp
(intern "BAR")
(symbolp 'bar) ; => T
~~~

### Value: 4

The symbol can be used to access a variable which currently bound to the integer
value 4. If we ever try to use this symbol in a situation where variable access
is required, 4 will be used. For example, `(+ foo 5)` will evaluate to 9.


### Function: #<FUNCTION FOO>

The symbol can *also* be used to access a function. Whether a function or
variable is accessed depends solely on the context the symbol is used in. For
example, `(foo)` will call the function named by the symbol `foo`.


### Plist: NIL

This symbol has no *properties*. See [this CLL page][symbol-props] for more
details.

[symbol-props]: https://www.cs.cmu.edu/Groups/AI/html/cltl/clm/node108.html


### The class FOO

Not shown in the `inspect` output, but the symbol also names a class. An
instance of this class can be created with `(make-instance 'foo)`. This is shown
if you use `M-x slime-inspect` in Emacs to inspect `'foo`.


[clhs-intern]: http://clhs.lisp.se/Body/f_intern.htm
